KOTLIN: why a Kotlin change is slow, what it costs, and the options you have

WHY IT IS SLOW
  Moving a Kotlin file and fixing every import, or renaming a symbol in every Kotlin and Java file that
  uses it, needs a compiler front end that understands the Gradle build, the Java interop and Android.
  The only server that does is the JetBrains Kotlin language server, which is IntelliJ IDEA without its
  window. refac starts it for the command and stops it when the command ends. Nothing stays resident,
  so a single change pays the whole start:
    JVM and initialize                      4 s
    Gradle import of the project            3 s with a running Gradle daemon, 11 s with a cold one
    indexing the JDK and the Kotlin libs    about 19 s once; refac keeps the index in ~/.cache/refac
                                            (110 to 160 MB), so later calls skip most of it
    waiting until the server says "ready"   about 6 s
    the change itself                       1 to 3 s
  Measured on a small project: the first call on a machine takes about 44 s, the calls after it about
  24 s, and about 15 s when the Gradle daemon of the call before is still up (see option 3). The server
  and the Gradle daemon hold 1.3 to 1.8 GB while the command runs; a big project holds more.
  Twenty single changes as twenty commands take about 8 minutes. The same twenty in one call take
  about a minute: the start is paid once, each change then costs 1 to 3 s.

THE OPTIONS, BEST FIRST
  1. Collect the changes and make them in ONE call. Moves repeat the flags (the n-th source goes to
     the n-th target; one call can mix languages), renames take a list (one language per list):
       refac move --source-path a.kt --source-path b.kt --target-path pkg/a.kt --target-path pkg/b.kt
       echo '[{"file": "a.kt", "symbol": "old", "new_name": "new"}, {"file": "b.kt", "symbol": "x", "new_name": "y"}]' | refac rename --batch -
     A folder is one change that already moves all its files in one start. Renames first (they do not
     change paths), then one move call: two starts instead of one per change.
  2. One change is really all there is: run the same command again with --allow-single. It pays the
     24 s once. A dry run (--dry-run) is no shortcut: it makes the real change on a copy of the project
     to learn the plan, pays the start, and the real run pays it again. Use it for the plan, not as
     a cheap check.
  3. Several separate commands cannot be avoided (a script, a tool loop): set
     REFAC_KOTLIN_GRADLE_IDLE_SECS=120 (1 to 3600) in the environment. The Gradle daemon of the project
     then stays up that many seconds after the command, and the next command skips the 8 s of a cold
     import (24 s become 15 s). The price is the daemon's memory (several hundred MB) for those
     seconds after every command. It is off by default: the daemon stops 10 s after the import.
  4. You do not want the refusal at all: set REFAC_KOTLIN_BATCH_ONLY=0 (a person's choice, not an
     agent's: the refusal is what keeps a series of single changes from costing minutes). The note
     with these numbers stays on every single Kotlin change.
  5. Where the index lives: REFAC_KOTLIN_CACHE=<directory> moves it, REFAC_KOTLIN_CACHE=off keeps
     nothing (every start is about 20 s slower). It is deleted when it passes 2 GB. A slow machine
     can raise REFAC_KOTLIN_TIMEOUT_SECS (default 600).

WHAT DOES NOT HELP
  A build cache or task runner (Gradle's build cache, Moon, Nx) replays work whose inputs did not
  change. Here every command changes the inputs, and the cost is the server start, not a build. A
  server that stays resident between commands would remove the start, but it would hold 1.3 to 1.8 GB
  per project all day and refac does not offer one.

IF YOU ARE AN AGENT
  Do not call Kotlin changes one by one. Collect everything first, then make one call (option 1). If
  you only found out that there are more changes after the first one, finish the series in one call
  and say so; do not turn the refusal off to keep going.
